---
layout: post
title:  "RFC 1738"
date:   2019-10-23 01:08:17 -0400
categories: [ rfc, url, pipe ]
---

Here's something I learned. I was playing around with a project. After it was..
ahem "done".. it occurred to me that I should run it through an HTML and CSS
validator. The W3C has these available [here for CSS][w3c-css] and [here for
HTML][w3c-html]. This is the error I got for the HTML:

```
Error: Bad value
https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Pacifico|Snippet&display=swap for
attribute href on element link: Illegal character in query: | is not allowed.
```
I was confused because the error came from a URL provided by [Google
fonts][google-fonts]. Questions quickly came to mind. Was the validator
outdated? Was Google providing a wrong link? If the pipe character is illegal
then why is it illegal? Was it illegal before and is now permitted? Are there
other illegal characters and if so which ones are they? Questions ad nauseam.
Researching I saw someone on Stack Overflow mention that you had to encode the
URL by changing the pipe character to its ASCII equivalent, in this case `%7C`.
I mean okay but why isn't Google proving it from the get go? So I asked them: 

> Is there a reason that the standard embed font link uses a pipe instead of
> encoding it to %7C when selecting more than one font? I couldn't find the
> information and it comes up as an error in the w3c html validator.

They replied: 

> It is easier for humans, and browsers will not misinterpret it, but you should
> url encode the character :)

This just raised more questions. While it did answer Google's reasoning for
proving it in that format, it didn't explain why I should have to encode it. I
mean why wouldn't the browser misinterpret it? And if it won't misinterpret it,
then why should I encode it? Which one is correct? I decided to look into it.

Reading the error messages tells you right away that the problem is with the
pipe itself. You can figure out pretty quickly that to resolve the issue you
need to encode it. That's fine but I still had questions. I read [this
answer][so-answer-1] on Stack Overflow where a user remarked that [RFC
1738][rfc-1738] specifies the following characters as being unsafe: {, }, |, \,
^, ~,[, ], and \`. Now we have a lead. 

## Wait. What's an RFC?

Request For Comments. *Aaannd* that's about all I knew about that. When I first
heard the term my brain probably filled in the details and just went "yeah this
is where they request comments, next". Thanks system 1. If you reflect on it a
bit, it doesn't make sense. Why would we refer to documentation that requests
comments? Are we still discussing it? Are they asking *moi*? Can anyone comment?
*Ahhhh!!* More questions that I want answers to! And so I went and got them.
It's actually pretty cool.

RFCs are the Internet Engineering Task Force's (IETF) [standard's
publications][ietf-rfcs] where they cover "protocols, procedures, programs, and
concepts, as well as meeting notes, opinions, and sometimes humor". In general
anything to do with computer networking. There are three ways to get an RFC
published. The processes kind of differ but I'll spare you some details. The
gist of it is you write a draft explaining your idea and if there's a group
that's working on the topic you may ask them to consider your proposal. They can
reject it, ask for modifications or explanations. If they decide to adopt it
there may be some revisions required. The working group then sends it to their
area director who can comment on it. It's then passed along so others can review
it and comment if they want to. At some point it's also sent to other standards
development organizations such as the W3C, IEEE, etc., who can look at the
document and send comments. There are other steps to the process but in general
it's this feedback loop where the proposal is submitted, reviewed and commented
on, revised and resubmitted. If you want more details on the process the [IETF
has a 26 minute video][YT-ietf-rfc] going over it. They actually have a [full
playlist][YT-ietf-list] on what they do that you can check out. It's pretty neat
and is now in my list of things to do in my life.

Learning about the process makes the name RFC much more clear. It's basically
the process which the documentation goes through before being published. And
since we continue to update them and new RFCs replace previous ones it's always
in a state where it can be commented on because you can make a proposal to
change it. No one has to listen to you but you can chime in. 

## RFC 1738

Alright now I know about RFCs. Next, let's look at [RFC 1738][rfc-1738]. It was
published in December 1994. Continuing with the questioning, I had wondered if
it was still valid. Wonder no more because the IETF has a [search
tool][ietf-datatracker] for looking up RFCs. When you look up RFC 1738, there's
a **Status** under one of the columns. This particular RFC has a description
that says **Obsoleted by** and **Updated by** which lists more RFCs.

```
Obsoleted by RFC4248, RFC4266
Updated by RFC1808, RFC2368, RFC2396, RFC3986, RFC6196, RFC6270, RFC8089
```
So many open tabs. So little time. Alright, I may have strayed a bit. Let's go
back to the questions I have:

- What is RFC 1738?
- Why is a pipe an illegal character and are there others?
- Why did Google say a browser will not misinterpret it?
- Why should I encode?

Let's go through them one by one.

**What is RFC 1738**: I had the number and now we have a title: Uniform Resource
Locators (URL). The abstract reads:

> This document specifies a Uniform Resource Locator (URL), the syntax and
> semantics of formalized information for location and access of resources via
> the Internet.

In the document we get answers to some of the other questions.

**Why is a pipe an illegal character?** : The character is actually listed as
being unsafe. The term `illegal` is not found anywhere in RFC 1738. The reason
the pipe character is unsafe is because [gateways][wiki-gateway] and other
transport agents (I think they mean hardware like routers) are known to
sometimes change the characters.

**Are there others?** : Yes. The reasons for them being unsafe can differ
between characters though so you can read the RFC if you're wondering about a
specific character. Here's the list of characters deemed unsafe: the space, the
characters `<` and `>`, the quote mark `"`, the octothorpe `#`, the `%`, `{`,
`}`, `|`, `\`, `^`, `~`, `[`, `]`, and the backtick \`. The RFC also goes on
to specify that "all unsafe characters must always be encoded within a URL".

As previously mentioned [RFC 1738][rfc-1738] was published in 1994 and according
to the information provided by the IETF search tool it was obsoleted by
[RFC4248][rfc-4248] and [RFC4266][rfc-4266]. These documents don't mention
anything regarding the characters. RFC4266 has to do with the [Gopher
protocol][gopher-protocol] (*!!*) which we don't currently care about because
HTTP ftw.

In regards to the protocols that update RFC 1738, we can forget about RFCs 2368,
6196, 6270 and 8089 because they're not relevant. And while RFCs 1808, 2396 and
3986 may have some information buried within, after overviewing them I'm fairly
certain that they don't contradict the statement that unsafe characters should
be encoded in a URL.

Now this leads us back to Google's response. Let's suppose that the [RFC
1738][rfc-1738] is still valid in regards to requesting the `|` be encoded. We
still have the same questions here: **why did Google say a browser will not
misinterpret it and why should I encode?**

Here I believe I was asking the wrong questions. In regards to the browser what
they mean is that when they URL decode the string the pipe will remain
unchanged. But the questions I should have asked myself is "In what kind of
situation could the pipe character be mangled?" This I am told is a rare
occurrence. When I asked around I learned that there was a time when ASCII
existed side by side with something called [EBCDIC][wiki-ebcdic]. Apparently
when you try converting ASCII and EBCDIC you can run into problems with the
pipe — probably with other characters too but I haven't checked — and get the
wrong conversion. This may be the reason why back in 1994 they decided to deem
the pipe as being unsafe to use in URLs.

I don't know if there's any other situation where the pipe may be mangled but I
guess it's still better to encode it. Google even suggested it. I'm still unsure
whether I think they should provide it encoded or not. But I don't need to have
an opinion on everything.

[w3c-css]: https://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/
[w3c-html]: https://validator.w3.org/#validate_by_uri
[so-answer-1]: https://stackoverflow.com/a/22469221
[google-fonts]: https://fonts.google.com/
[rfc-1738]: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1738.txt
[ietf-rfcs]: https://www.ietf.org/standards/rfcs/
[YT-ietf-rfc]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j3Toe4P9Pa8
[YT-ietf-list]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_TlqisFpMGw&list=PLC86T-6ZTP5hXPJ
[ietf-datatracker]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/
[wiki-gateway]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gateway_(telecommunications)
[rfc-4248]: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4248.txt
[rfc-4266]: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4266.txt
[gopher-protocol]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gopher_(protocol)
[wiki-ebcdic]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EBCDIC
