---
layout: post
title:  "Sleepless nights"
date:   2020-01-30 23:08:17 -0400
categories: [misc, sleep ]
---

Hey Heather, it's me again.

For the last year and a half my sleep schedule has been pretty disrupted. I'll
spare you the details but suffice to say that this has a negative impact on my
being. I've gradually been taking steps to try and remedy the situation and
thought I'd share some information I came across. What I'm sharing comes from
[Matthew Walker][wiki-matthew-walker], a scientist and professor of neuroscience
and psychology at the University of California. Here are the main tips I [heard
him discuss][podcast-matthew]. I'll elaborate my take on them afterwards:

1. Regularity: go to sleep at the same time everyday.
2. Cool room: the room temperature should between 18.5°C and 20°C.
3. Lights out: make sure your room is blackout dark.
4. Beverage control: No caffeine in the afternoon and no alcohol in the evening.
5. Get up: Don't stay in bed for more than 20 minutes if you're not sleeping

Simple, yet somewhat difficult too. For instance, you can be pretty consistent
during the week but once Friday roles around and you have dinner plans, or
parties, or like me you late-night overindulge on [Bon Appétit][YT-bon-appetit]
videos, your schedule gets out of sync with your intentions. I haven't figured
out regularity yet. Right now I'm just glad I'm not hitting the hay at 5am and
lamenting that I should've known better. Anyway, for regularity you have to find
something that works with your schedule and activities. Some compromises may
need to be made. It's a work in progress.

I've got a trick for keeping the temperature cool. So realistically, I don't
want to be cold. It's not my jam. However your body needs to lower its
temperature to initiate sleep. In the interview it's suggested to take a hot
bath or shower before going to bed because it helps lower your core temperature.
This has to do with [vasodilation][wiki-vasodilation] and the fact that your
blood rushes to the surface of your skin after a hot bath. I didn't find an
explanation on how this works exactly but I'm assuming this somehow helps your
body in expelling heat. In my case what I do before hopping into the shower is I
turn up the heat in my room so that it's at a comfortable temperature when I get
out.  Once I'm ready for bed, I just turn it back down. This takes care of the
dread I feel right before entering what I know to be a cold room. After I turn
it down, the room cools fairly quickly too, especially this time of year.

For the lighting situation, I had struggled quite a bit. Trying to tape
different parts of the blinds. Putting sheets in front of the gaps of the door.
Now I just have a very soft and light sleep mask. It's very comfortable and
doesn't bother me. The only problem is that it sometimes slips off. Not as often
as I thought it would though! Some can be expensive I think but I got mine for
about $15. I'm satisfied with it and would buy again.

Beverages! Alright. So I really like coffee. But I don't drink it the same way I
see other people drink it. Some people are content with large volumes of subpar
milk coffee beverages from dirty, lactose-encrusted tube machines. I'll pass.
Some have also mentioned needing it to function in general. I don't want that
discomfort. I don't like having a headache when I've not had coffee so I avoid
drinking it in an excessive manner. I'll have maybe one espresso a week, if
that. If I want a hot beverage in the afternoon I sometimes get a
[decaf][wiki-decaf] moka since it has a less caffeine (*it still has some
though!!*). Or I'll opt for a hot chocolate with oat milk. I'm all about the oat
milk nowadays.  I like having a hot beverage to hold when it's cold out.  Tea is
a good option too. As for alcohol... well I like alcohol.  Different types for
different reasons and occasions. I don't think I drink that often though so this
isn't causing sleep issues. If I do drink a bit too much I have other things to
worry about. Like the distance between a drain and myself.

Lastly I find the recommendation to avoid staying in bed more than 20 minutes if
you're not asleep doesn't apply to me. Or maybe I'm trying to persuade myself
that it doesn't. For now, I'm just generally skipping this recommendation. The
problem I'm having isn't the falling asleep part, it's the getting to the place
where sleep happens at a reasonable time. Which reminds me. Maybe I shouldn't be
up late writing these words.

Do as I say. Not as I do.

[wiki-matthew-walker]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matthew_Walker_(scientist)
[YT-bon-appetit]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Sl_9VMeAWg
[podcast-matthew]: https://www.thepodcastbrowser.com/everything-you-know-about-sleep-is-wrong-with-dr-matthew-walker/
[wiki-vasodilation]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vasodilation
[wiki-decaf]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decaffeination
