---
layout: post
title:  "Pandemic software worries me"
date:   2021-02-01 22:08:17 -0500
categories: [pandemic, software]
---

Hey Heather, it's me again.

What was that text message I sent you a few weeks ago? Ah, yes.

> (...) I just learned that the government awarded a contract to Deloitte to
develop new software to track the vaccine + symptoms. Contract was awarded a few
days ago, and the thing has to be ready in a month. My automatic reaction is ...
this is BS

A bit more ranting ensued but suffice to say I was quite skeptical of the whole
endeavor. This has been in the back of my mind the whole of January. To clarify:
on January 7th, the Canadian government awarded a $16 million contract to
Deloitte to develop software for the vaccination rollout. And it would have to
go live by the end of January.

I think it's safe to say that if you've ever worked in software you've already
imagined a gamut of scenarios and repercussions of this decision. I don't know
about you but my stress level shot up when I found out about this. It shot up
even more when I read [this article][tech-review-article] on the software
Deloitte developed for the US. Here's a small quote from the article:

> "the problem, she said, was user error."

I have so many problems with this that I'm not even going to get into it.

Lamenting isn't going to change the fact that we are going to have to deal with
whatever this brings. Now, is there a chance that the software developed works
alright and only has minor bugs? Yes. Is the complexity reduced because Canada
has a universal health care system? I mean I would think so. Is it possible that
the company learned a lot by developing this software for another country first?
Probably??

In the present situation we should be using [Defensive
Pessimism][wiki-defensive-pessimism][^1]. You have to be ready for things to go
bad so you can mitigate the problems. If this system doesn't work, we still need
to be able to get people vaccinated **quickly**. Unfortunately I have no
oversight in the matter but since we already have a system for vaccination, I
believe that could serve as a fallback. After that, there's always pen and
paper.

For my part, I've been thinking of where things can go wrong, where I can help,
and what sacrifices I'm willing to make. I haven't seen issues like what the US
is going through. Though this may be because the vaccine rollout here has been
***really*** slow and hasn't been expanded to a larger scale. We are starting to
see large vaccination sites being set up finally. There's a chance that will
reveal systematic issues. Our main problem is speed. We need to pick up the
pace. My school of thought on this front is same day vaccination: the day we get
vaccines is the day we use the vaccines. We'd do well to have much less
complacency, and a lot more ambition right now.

<br>
<hr>

[^1]: Ok, so the expression defensive pessimism is generally used when you set low expectations for yourself but I couldn't remember if there was a similar expression for having low expectation of others as a defense mechanism, lmk if you know one!

[tech-review-article]: https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/01/30/1017086/cdc-44-million-vaccine-data-vams-problems/
[wiki-defensive-pessimism]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Defensive_pessimism
