---
layout: post
title:  "Why even be a software developer"
date:   2022-03-25 12:08:17 -0500
categories: [ developing ]
---

_\* I went through some old drafts that were polluting my directory. This is the
last post I've revised; the rest have been discarded._

**tl;dr**: It only needs to make sense to you.

On your path as a software developer, there's at least a slight chance someone
will subtly or directly questions your motives. Maybe it'll come from a person
who's close to you and who you respect. Or perhaps from a stranger. Maybe you'll
read a chat log or questionnaire, or you'll hear something on a podcast and
you'll feel like what they're saying is directed at you. Maybe it'll be a vague
comment. But whichever way the question arises, to you it'll feel like they're
saying "Why are you even doing this, you're not even that good".

The answer to this question "why are you even..." only matters if it makes sense
to you.

That's it. That's the whole idea. Does it make sense to you?

There are no illegitimate reasons. Heck, you don't even need to understand your
own motivations. "It looks cool" is a valid reason. Doing it for someone else is
a valid reason. Doing it for status is a valid reason. Doing it to later become
a carpet salesperson? If you can weave those things together, sure! Why not.
It's fine.

And really, you don't even need to answer the question. You can decide whether
or not to reflect on it. And sure, writing down the reasons for yourself may
help whenever your own doubts creep in. But the general point is that you have
the agency to decide *why even do a thing*.

You probably already went through the thought process in some form. If you want
to revisit the question, that's up to you.

It's fine if you do, and fine if you don't.

As for the "you're not even that good" part. Please. If I stopped doing
everything I wasn't very good at, I'd still have someone holding my fork and
tying my shoe laces. At some point in my life, that was likely the most
challenging thing I was ever asked to do.

PS: more adult shoes should leverage the power of velcro.

