---
layout: post
title:  "Iron, man"
date:   2023-12-31 18:03:11 -0500
categories: [ iron, nutrition]
---

Did you know that iron deficiency is the most common nutritional deficiency in
[the world][anemia]? **I** did not. What's weird about it is that while there
are many [symptoms][wiki-anemia], they can be misconstrued as signs stemming
from other causes. Tired in the afternoon? Oh well, I didn't sleep well. Trouble
focusing? Must be because of the lack of sleep. You look pale. Maybe I should
get out more.

As you can guess from the fact that I'm writing this article, I lacked iron.
Most of my symptoms were inconspicuous. I mean, everyone gets tired now and
then. Though I did have one symptom that wasn't mentioned in any article I read.
The skin on my hands and face was less taut. I just though it was due to the
passage of time. 

Diagnosis and treatment is _usually_ pretty simple. You get a blood test which
checks the levels of a protein that stores and releases iron called
[Ferritin][wiki-ferritin]. If the levels are low, you take an iron supplement
that will increase your stored iron. That's if you don't have an absorption
problem. You can also modify your diet to make sure you get enough in your
meals. There are also other indicators that can be checked during the blood test
but I know less about those.

Anyway, I found [this table][wiki-ferritin-range] that shows how much ferritin
you should have depending on your sex and age:

| Adult males   | 40–300 ng/mL (μg/L) |
| Adult females | 20–200 ng/mL (μg/L) |
| Children      | 50–140 ng/mL (μg/L) |
| Infants       | 50–200 ng/mL (μg/L) |
| Neonates      | 25–200 ng/mL (μg/L) |

<br>

To close off this tale of suspense, do you wanna know what my levels were?

I had 2 μg/L. It's a marvel I could still function with such a stark deficit.

[anemia]: https://ourworldindata.org/micronutrient-deficiency#anemia-iron-or-vitamin-b12-deficiency
[wiki-anemia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iron-deficiency_anemia
[wiki-ferritin]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferritin
[wiki-ferritin-range]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferritin#Normal_ranges
