---
layout: post
title:  "1&nbsp;000 days of yoga"
date:   2023-03-31 12:08:17 -0500
categories: [ habits, exercices]
---

I've hit a milestone. 1&nbsp;000 consecutive days of yoga. I for one am
unimpressed. It was never a goal. It's incidental. And now that I think about
it, it's kind of irritating. What about all the other habits I want to do
regularly? Why haven't those worked? What gives?

Leading up to the regular practice, I learned about habit building in part from
the episode [Creatures of Habit][podcast-habits] by the podcast Hidden Brain.
Here are some of the decisions I recall. Maybe writing it out can help me with
the other habits I want.

## Choosing a start date

Last week you said Monday. Yesterday you said tomorrow. When does choosing a
date actually work? I still don't really know. But I've learned that when the
status quo is disrupted, you can use it as an opportunity to start. I definitely
have bad habits from past disruptions, so why not try for a good one. I started
the yoga practice on my first day at a new company. I was already going to shift
my wake up time by 30 minutes, so instead I shifted it an hour earlier.

## No breaks

I will come up with an excuse for any, and every day of the week. From refusing
exertion because _it's the weekend_, to calling Thursday the weekend's aperitif,
I will convince myself not to do the thing. Knowing that from past attempts, I
knew I had to set the rule: this is daily. No breaks. No more excuses. No more
_but it's Cyber Monday_.

## Tell me what to do

A few months before I started the practice, someone mentioned the YouTube
channel [Yoga with Adriene][YT-yoga]. Had it not been for this channel, I don't
think I would've started. I didn't know what sequence of movements to do or how
to do them. It just looked like fancy stretching. Of course I knew there was
more to it than that. Having a guide explain the sequences reduced the friction
to start. My only prep work was checking out the list of videos, and making a
playlist of a few shorter ones for the days I'd feel lazy.

## minmax(5m,35m)

Speaking of lazy. We all have days where we'd rather just not. I needed to
preemptively address this. Mentally — because I don't use a timer — I set a
range I deemed acceptable. If I really, _really_ don't feel like doing it, I
confront myself with _Oh, so you don't even have 5 minutes?_ Which is promptly
followed by an eye roll and a _ughh, fineee!_ from my inner teenager.

## Setting a trap

The decisions I make are useless if I forget them. Years ago, when I had a gym
membership, I used to schedule training in my calendar. If only I had consulted
it. This time, I decided to set a trap. I placed my mat at the threshold of my
bedroom. This way, the moment I stepped out of my room my thoughts would be
interrupted and I'd be reminded of what I had to do.

## No suit for you

Shout-out to those who get changed more than twice a day. It can't be me. I used
to be a runner. Suiting up was part of the motivation. This oddly didn't ever
translate to other activities. It was always such a drag. I don't want to get
changed again. So my sleepwear now has the added requirement that it needs to be
comfortable enough for yoga.

## Push-ups are a lie

I don't believe in push-ups. I don't do them. I don't care. Attempts to convince
me are unwelcome and frowned upon. If you like push-ups, that's great. You do
you. But I'm over it.

## Stop. Collaborate and listen to what my body is telling me

When I began, I had no idea what I was doing. The videos would describe the
movements, and then I'd have to hold a position for 200 years. I was weak and
often failed. But in a moment of clarity I realized: (8)you do it to yourself,
just you; you and no one else(8).

There is no one in the room but me. I'm choosing to follow the instructions. I
can also choose to adapt them.

[podcast-habits]: https://hiddenbrain.org/podcast/creatures-of-habit/
[YT-yoga]: https://www.youtube.com/user/yogawithadriene

